Dynamo action powered by solar convection causes the Sun to be magnetically active.  The workings of the solar magnetic dynamo have been greatly informed by numerical simulations.  Traditionally, these simulations have described solar-type stars with high rotation rates and large characteristic convective motions compared to solar values.  Here I propose a suite of 3-D numerical simulations of the solar convective zone which implements accurate solar rotation and convective velocity profiles  and will be developed using the state-of-the-art anelastic spherical harmonics (ASH) code. My primary goal is to determine the role of the solar tachocline, the rotational shear layer at the base of the convective zone, in the production and sustenance of the solar magnetic dynamo.  Furthermore, I propose a set of simulations of increased complexity that will include the supergranulation of the solar photosphere.  Data from these simulations will be post-processed to create synthetic observables.  Such mock-observables will be compared directly to data gathered by the Solar Dynamics Observatory and used to predict observations of the upcoming Solar Orbiter.  This project supports objective 1.4 of NASA's 2014 Strategic Plan and will assist in developing "the knowledge and capability to detect and predict extreme conditions in space" in accordance with NASA's overarching Heliophysics science goals.



OLD----------------------------

Dynamo action powered by solar convection causes the Sun to be magnetically active. The workings of the solar magnetic dynamo have been greatly informed by numerical simulations. Traditionally, these simulations have described solar-type stars with high rotation rates and large characteristic convective motions compared to solar values. Here I propose a suite of 3-D numerical simulations of the solar convective zone with accurate solar rotation and convective velocity profiles, developed using the state-of-the-art anelastic spherical harmonics (ASH) code. My primary goal is to determine the role of the solar tachocline, the rotational shear layer at the base of the convective zone, in the production and sustenance of the solar magnetic dynamo. Furthermore, I propose a set of simulations of increased complexity that will include the supergranulation of the solar photosphere for the purpose of post-processing to create synthetic observables. Such mock-observables will be compared directly to data gathered by the Solar Dynamics Observatory and used to predict observations of the upcoming Solar Orbiter. This project supports objective 1.4 of NASA’s 2014 Strategic Plan and will assist in developing “the knowledge and capability to detect and predict extreme conditions in space” in accordance with NASA’s overarching Heliophysics science goals.
